[Music]
to Naval Intelligence
when war broke out on the continent in
August 1914 the Office of Naval
Intelligence had immediate access to
situational information through the
naval attache system the gun in 1882
these official observation stations
existed in London Paris st. Petersburg
Berlin Rome Vienna Madrid and The Hague
and gave the Navy a reason for a less
obtrusive presence amidst the
hostilities than the Army's observer
Arrangements no better work was done in
the war than that conducted and covered
by the offices of some of our naval
attache z' their work primarily of
course was to acquire purely naval
information secondarily military
economical and political news that could
be of any benefit to America or her
associates in the war in some cases
however a great deal of the work was not
strictly either naval or military though
indirectly of vast import to both
branches affiliations were established
with influential men in the country men
in government positions were in business
and their sympathy for the aunt aunt and
America encouraged and in some cases
enlisted for in Spain and the northern
neutral countries there was a strong
tide of pro-german ISM to fight in
collaboration with the Committee on
Public Information means were taken
through the channels of the newspapers
movies etc to influence public opinion
and give it the Allies point of view
among the most important things which
came under the jurisdiction of our naval
attache x' where the investigation of
officers crews and passengers on ships
bound for and coming from america the
senders and receivers of cable grams
inspections of cargoes and shipments and
investigations of firms suspected of
trading with the enemy under the naval
anti Shaye's to the coasts were closely
watched for the detection of enemy
vessels or persons who might be giving
aid or information to them in every
foreign country to which an American
naval attache was accredited they
carried on for the Navy in line with her
best traditions footnote US Navy
Department office of naval records into
library u.s. naval intelligence before
and during the war by Captain Edward
McAuley jr. undated typescript pages 1 &
2 this document is currently on file
with and was made available for this
study by the National Archives & Records
Service with regard to the Committee on
Public Information see George creel how
we advertised America New York and
London Harper & Brothers 1920 James our
mock censorship 1917 Princeton Princeton
University Press 1941 and Cedric Larsen
words that won the war Princeton
Princeton University Press 1939 William
Franklin Willoughby government
organization and wartime and after New
York d Appleton & Company 1919 pages 33
through 39 and footnote in the spring of
1915 Congress established a central
administrative structure within the Navy
with the creation of the Chief of Naval
Operations
shortly after this office was
established the Office of Naval
Intelligence was transferred to it and
renamed the Naval Intelligence Division
this heightened organizational status
provided naval intelligence with
continuous access to the higher levels
of navy administration and
decision-making extending all the way to
the secretary Josephus Daniels footnote
see for example II dated Cronin the
Cabinet Diaries of Josephus Daniels 1913
through 1921 Lincoln University of
Nebraska Press 1963 pages 117 209 211
and 212 246 and 293 and footnote unlike
military intelligence the naval
counterpart seems to have enjoyed some
degree of acceptance with the officer
corps and had various leaders rather
than one champion from the inception
through the war years directors of Naval
Intelligence TBM Mason 1882 through 85
Raymond P Rogers 1885
I've through 89 Charles H Davis 1889
through 92 French II Chadwick 1892
through 93
Frederick singer 1893 through 96 Richard
Wainwright 1896 through 97 Richardson
clover 1897 through 98 John R Bartlett
1898 Richardson clover 1898 through 1900
d 6b 1900 through 1903 Seaton Schroeder
1903 through o6 Raymond P Rogers 1906
through onine Charles E Vreeland 1909
Templin M Potts 1909 through 12 Thomas s
Rogers 1912 through 13
Henry F Bryan 1913 through 14 James H
Oliver 1914 through 17 Roger Welles 19
17 through 19 and Albert P Niblick 19 19
through 20
at the time of American entry into the
world war naval intelligence consisted
of 18 clerks and eight officers with the
Armistice the division counted 306
reservists 18 clerks and over 40 naval
attache z' and assistant and essays by
July in 1920 this force was reduced to a
staff of 42 during the war years the
division was organized into four
sections administrative intelligence or
incoming information compiling or
processing and historical or byproducts
quote and byproducts for instance we
include one the naval library to the
dead files which include war Diaries of
all ships and stations and their
correspondence during the war three
statistics and four international law
questions and cases which arose during
the war
the compiling section works over a good
deal of information that comes in to put
it in more useful form a monthly
bulletin of confidential information on
naval progress is issued and this
section also prepares monographs of
various kinds on various countries and
subjects all information that is
received is routed out to the various
government departments to which it is
considered it will be of use the State
Department and military intelligence
receive of course practically all that
we get of general value special
information we send to the various
departments of the government such as
the Department of Justice the attitude
of the office is that it is its duty to
collect and furnish information but not
necessarily to advise or suggest and
quote footnote u.s. Navy Department
division of operations the history and
aims of the Office of Naval Intelligence
by Rear Admiral APD black Washington US
government print off Asst 1920 pages 23
through 24 copies of this study bear the
marking not for publication indicating
limited distribution the copy utilized
in this study was supplied by the
National Archives and records service in
footnote by this and other accounts it
would seem that naval intelligence
collected maintained and supplied raw
data but engaged in little analysis of
this material other than the most
rudimentary assessments the intelligence
product had offered was crude the
information collection arrangements
instituted by Naval Intelligence
reflected both ambition and
sophistication quote the homework was
divided under 15 aides for information
one of these aides being attached to the
Admiral in command of each Naval
District each aide had the supervision
of intelligence work in his district but
he worked of course in conjunction with
and under instructions from the main
office in Washington his duty included
information about all shipping and
information necessary for its protection
against possible unfriendly acts of
agents or sympathizers of the central
powers
he had to arrange for the observation of
the coast and to establish information
services for the report of any
suspicious vessel or Coast activities to
discover the location and establishment
actual or proposed of bases for
submarines and to detect illegal radio
stations or the location of enemy goods
in storage under the naval aides came
the duty of detecting and combating
espionage or sabotage and Sippy n't or
actual along the waterfronts in the Navy
yard's or in the factories or works
connected with the arts that included
any investigations that were required in
connection with the Navy personnel of
the district in order to prevent damage
to ships guards were placed on every
ship entering the harbors of the United
States and remained on board until the
ship cleared in addition to this all
crews were inspected in order to see
that each member had his proper
identification papers and suspicious
members of a crew or a passenger list or
thoroughly searched together with their
baggage all cargoes were inspected and
manifests checked in order to thwart any
illegal shipments from the country and
to prevent bombs and incendiary devices
from being placed on ships later this
work was taken over by the customs
division of the Treasury Department and
controlled by them though the Navy
continued the work with them end quote
footnote McCauley pages 2 & 3 & footnote
while the above account provides some
indication of the tasks performed by
Naval Intelligence during the
hostilities quote these specific orders
under which the office operates for war
purposes is best given in the
instructions to naval attache x' and
others in regard to intelligence duty
issued in 1917 1 the fleet's of foreign
powers to the war materiel of foreign
powers 3 the nautical personnel of
foreign powers and a general record of
the strength organization and
distribution of all foreign naval forces
for the war resources of foreign powers
doctrine of foreign powers foreign
policies in relations six
characteristics of foreign naval
officers of command rank seven defenses
and armaments of foreign ports eight
time required for the mobilization of
foreign navies and the probable form and
places of mobilization nine the lines
and means of water communication of
foreign countries and their facilities
for transporting troops overseas 10 the
adaptability of foreign private owned
vessels to war purposes and the routes
followed by regular steamer lines 11 the
facilities for obtaining coal fuel oil
gasoline and supplies and for having
repairs made in all foreign ports of the
world 12 climatic sanitary and other
peculiarities of foreign countries which
can have a bearing upon naval operations
13 the facilities on foreign coasts for
landing men and supplies and means for
supporting detached bodies of troops in
the interior 14 the canals and interior
waterways of the United States and
foreign countries available for the
passage of torpedo boats and other naval
craft 15 the collating and keeping
up-to-date of data relating to the
inspection and assignment of merchant
vessels under United States registry and
of such foreign private owned vessels as
may be indicated and 16 through
correspondence with owners consulting
trade journals and by other practical
means keeping track of the status and
location of different United States
merchant vessels listed as auxiliaries
for war of sales to other lines and of
changes in trade routes or terminal
ports which may make necessary a change
in the yard designated for war
preparation and to report such changes
in the list of ships to the Department
for its information the information of
the general board and the board of
inspection and survey in order that a
further inspection of particular ships
may be made if necessary end quote
footnote new black pages 14 through 5
dean and footnote another dimension of
naval intelligence operations was its
secret service facility quote in the
fall of 1916 a small branch office had
been established undercover in new york
thus began what was to prove one of the
largest and most useful phases of the
war work of naval intelligence
the new york office was used as a model
for the others which it was later found
necessary to establish in Philadelphia
Boston Baltimore Chicago Pittsburgh and
San Francisco these branch offices
worked directly under the control of
Washington covering work which could not
properly be turned over to the aides for
information their work was of paramount
importance and a whole job in itself to
them fell the investigation and guarding
of plants having Navy contracts over
5,000 plants were thus surveyed and
protected and hundreds of aliens and
many active energy agents were removed
and thus prevented from fulfilling their
missions in a district such as
Pittsburgh for instance with its large
foreign population that work assumed
such proportions that it became
necessary to establish our Pittsburgh
office to handle it end quote
footnote McCauley page 3 and footnote it
would also appear that some of these
special undercover agents served in
overseas Duty one documented example is
George F Zimmer a Los Angeles attorney
who after Secret Service in the New York
and Washington districts toured in the
Middle East and on the European
continent for some portion of these
duties he traveled on credentials
representing him as working for the
United States Food Administration quote
for the sole purpose of food relief end
quote
after the Armistice he went on a
photographic mission concentrating on
conditions in Europe and taking him into
portions of Russia footnote C George F
Zimmer and Burke voice k7 spies at war
new york de
19:34 and footnote it is not immediately
clear as to how many agents of this type
Naval Intelligence sponsored during and
shortly after the war but their number
would seem to be relatively few with
peace restored in the world the attache
is once again assumed their stations in
the territory of recent enemies reducing
the necessity for roving special
operatives
[Music]
this is our hidden history